In this video, you'll see
how the Kotlin
type hierarchy looks,
what Nothing type is used for,
and why you can't
use Unit instead.
Kotlin has the top
type in the hierarchy;
Any, which is a super
type of all types.
Kotlin also has a bottom type
which is a sub-type of
all the other types.
This one is called Nothing.
Now, let's understand
what it is used
for and why it's
called like this.
The confusion is possible,
because in Kotlin,
we have two new types:
Unit and Nothing,
in comparison to Java's void.
Unit is used instead of void,
but Nothing has the name
similar to void.
It might be unclear why
these types are different.
Let's try to understand why.
First, let's start with the Unit.
In Kotlin, Unit is used
always instead of void.
Whenever you use void in Java,
you use Unit in Kotlin.
It denotes that
no meaningful value
is returned from this function.
These two syntactic forms
are equivalent.
You can either specify
unit explicitly,
which no one does,
or you can simply omit it.
At the Bytecode, unit is
replaced with Java void.
In Kotlin, you always
use it instead of
void for the function
that has no return value.
Nothing is different
to Unit and void.
It means, the function
never returns.
You specify Nothing
return type for
the function that only
throws an exception.
In Kotlin, you can define
such a function and use it
instead of throwing an exception.
Imagine there is a specific
for your use case exception,
and you're always thrown to
read different details
in messages.
You can extract
throwing this exception
into a function and later call
this function instead
of all places
where you had to throw
an exception explicitly.
If you specify that this
function returns Nothing type,
then the Kotlin compiler
uses the information
that this function
can't be completed normally for
type inference and while
locating the dead code.
Unit and Nothing names come
from functional programming.
If we look at their definitions,
Unit is the type that
allows only one value,
while Nothing type has no values.
You can think of one-unit value
as of the fact that
the function is complete
and successful,
and you can think of the fact
that nothing has no values,
as this function never completes.
The function that only throws
an exception cannot
complete normally.
Another way to put
that is to say that
the function returning Unit
is expected to complete normally,
while the function returning
Nothing always
completes abnormally.
If you write a
function that has an
empty infinite while
true loop inside,
this function also
never completes,
and you can define Nothing
return type for it.
Using an empty infinite loop
is not really practical,
but the exception
cases are helpful.
You can use an expression
of Nothing type
anywhere where your otherwise
would throw an exception.
For instance, as an if branch.
Here, if the condition
is not satisfied,
you can throw an
exception or call
the function that throws
this specific exception.
Let's look at more examples
of expressions of Nothing type.
TODO is a function defined
in the standard library.
It throws node implemented error.
You can use throw as a
part of other expressions.
For example, it
might be convenient
to use it as a part
of elvis operator.
Here, you throw
a meaningful exception
when the left-hand
expression is null.
Fail can be your custom function
throwing your exception defined
for this specific use case.
Even return can be used as
a part of further
expressions, it just works.
Under the hood,
the compiler interprets
return as an expression
of Nothing type.
The question to you, which of
the following expressions are
expressions of Nothing type?
When you throw an exception,
this expression itself
has Nothing type.
When you call the function
that throws an exception,
that is also an expression
of Nothing type.
You can use a return as
[inaudible] the expressions,
and then the compiler interprets.
It is also an expression
of Nothing type.
Note that you can use
Kotlin unit as
a standalone expression.
It refers to one instance
of Unit type.
If you assign a function
returning unit to a variable,
then this variable will
store this unit value.
No one needs to assign it to
variable or explicitly
return a unit,
since the compiler
automatically enforce that when
no other values returned,
but that's possible.
Now, let's discuss why we
need a separate nothing type.
Why we can't simply use unit for
functions throwing
exceptions or vice versa,
Nothing for functions
completing normally.
At first, let's try to use
a report inside
the if expression,
like we did for functions
throwing exception.
It doesn't really make sense.
Report returns unit value,
and this unit value will
be stored in the answer variable.
Answer might then contain
either integer or
unit as a result.
That's probably not what we want.
Now, let's imagine our fail
function returns unit.
We define a function that
throws an exception,
but we somehow forget to say
that it returns nothing.
Reuse the regular syntax
and then it automatically
returns unit.
What happens in this case?
We'll try to understand
how the compiler
infers the type of
the resulting expression,
and we'll use
their representation
of type hierarchy for that.
Let's see how the compiler
enforce the type of
the answer variable.
It should be a super type of
expressions into first branch
and to the second branch.
At first, the compiler
analyzes the integer constant.
It has the Int type.
The fail function, in
our example, returns unit.
The compiler enforce
the super type
for Int and unit, which is any.
A function returning unit
can be a sign to a variable.
Then these variables
terse Kotlin unit value.
The unit value can't be
stored in a variable of
Int type but can be easily
stored in any variable.
That's why the compiler
infers any as the type of
this expression which totally
is not what we want here.
It happens if we use unit
as the return type of fail.
Now, let's correctly use
Nothing and see what changes.
The type of the first
expression is again Int.
In the second branch,
we now have failed call
which has Nothing type.
Since Nothing is a sub-type
of any other type,
that allows the compiler to
infer Int as the result.
It's the right value
because we're always
throwing an exception,
if condition is not satisfied.
So only integer value
can be stored in
the answer variable.
The Kotlin type system
allows us to express that.
That's why it's great that we
have the Nothing type
in the language.
It allows us to use
expressions of Nothing type,
extracts throwing an
exception into function
and use this function as
part of other expressions.
Nothing is replaced by void.
If your function returns nothing,
then at the Bytecode,
it will still return void
because there is
no Nothing type at JVM.
That means that from Java,
we use functions returning
Nothing as returning void.
In Kotlin, you use
all the bunch of
convenient Nothing features.
Now, you can better
understand the tab hierarchy.
Any is the top type,
nothing is the bottom type.
However, that's not that easy
because we also have
nullable types.
User type is a sub-type of
nullable user type because it can
assign user expression
to a variable of
nullable user type,
but not vice-versa.
Thus, the correct top type
is nullable any, not any.
An interesting question here is,
what means these
nullable Nothing type?
Think of what is
the simplest expression
of nullable Nothing type.
The answer is null constant.
Say, you define a variable
and initialize it with null.
Then if you try to assign
a new value to it,
you bump into an arrow
saying something
about type mismatch.
In first type is user,
but nullable nothing
was expected.
You can know to
the inferred nullable Nothing
for user variable here.
The same thing happens
when you create
a list and store null inside.
Nullable Nothing and list of
nullable Nothing types are
inferred by the compiler.
If you think about
it, that makes sense.
You can assign null as well as
the variable that stores null
to any other nullable type.
If you have a variable
of nullable Int,
you can assign null there.
Having a variable
of nullable nothing
is not really practical,
but sometimes you can
see similar errors,
so it's good to know how it
works from the compiler
point of view.
There is an easy solution
that fixes this example.
You specify the variable
type explicitly
whenever you want to
initialize it to read null.
Then it has the right type,
the type you want.
Now you know why Unit can't
be instead of Nothing,
and that the only expression
nullable Nothing type
is the null constant.
Next, we will discuss how
Kotlin nullable types
interact with Java types.